The Project Gutenberg eBook of Home Canning of Fruits and Vegetables,
by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Home Canning of Fruits and Vegetables
       Home and Garden Bulletin No. 8, U. S. Department of Agriculture

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: August 25, 2021 [eBook #66136]

Language: English

Produced by: Stephen Hutcheson, Lisa Corcoran and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOME CANNING OF FRUITS AND
VEGETABLES ***





                 Home CANNING of Fruits and Vegetables


                     HOME AND GARDEN BULLETIN No. 8
                    U. S. DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE




                                CONTENTS


                                                                    Page
  Right canner for each food                                           3
  Getting your equipment ready                                         3
  General canning procedure                                            5
  How to can fruits, tomatoes, pickled vegetables                      9
  Directions for fruits, tomatoes, pickled vegetables                 11
  How to can vegetables                                               16
  Directions for vegetables                                           18
  Questions and answers                                               29
  Index                                                               31


                              Prepared by
                   HUMAN NUTRITION RESEARCH DIVISION
                     Agricultural Research Service

Acknowledgment is made to the Massachusetts Agricultural Experiment
Station and the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station for cooperation in
the development of some of the home-canning processes included in this
publication, and to the National Canners Association for consultation
and advice on processing.

  Washington, D.C.
                                                   Revised February 1965
                                               Slightly revised May 1965


 For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing
                                 Office
                Washington, D.C. 20402 - Price 15 cents




                 Home CANNING of Fruits and Vegetables


    [Illustration: uncaptioned]

Organisms that cause food spoilage—molds, yeasts, and bacteria—are
always present in the air, water, and soil. Enzymes that may cause
undesirable changes in flavor, color, and texture are present in raw
fruits and vegetables.

When you can fruits and vegetables you heat them hot enough and long
enough to destroy spoilage organisms. This heating (or processing) also
stops the action of enzymes. Processing is done in either a
boiling-water-bath canner or a steam-pressure canner. The kind of canner
that should be used depends on the kind of food being canned.




                       Right Canner for Each Food


_For fruits, tomatoes, and pickled vegetables_, use a boiling-water-bath
canner. You can process these acid foods safely in boiling water.

_For all common vegetables except tomatoes_, use a steam-pressure
canner. To process these low-acid foods safely in a reasonable length of
time takes a temperature higher than that of boiling water.

A pressure saucepan equipped with an accurate indicator or gage for
controlling pressure at 10 pounds (240° F.) may be used as a
steam-pressure canner for vegetables in pint jars or No. 2 tin cans. If
you use a pressure saucepan, add 20 minutes to the processing times
given in this publication for each vegetable.




                      Getting Your Equipment Ready


Steam-Pressure Canner

_For safe operation_ of your canner, clean petcock and safety-valve
openings by drawing a string or narrow strip of cloth through them. Do
this at beginning of canning season and often during the season.

_Check pressure gage._—An accurate pressure gage is necessary to get the
processing temperatures needed to make food keep.

_A weighted gage_ needs to be thoroughly clean.

_A dial gage_, old or new, should be checked before the canning season,
and also during the season if you use the canner often. Ask your county
home demonstration agent, dealer, or manufacturer about checking it.

If your gage is off 5 pounds or more, you’d better get a new one. But if
the gage is not more than 4 pounds off, you can correct for it as shown
below. As a reminder, tie on the canner a tag stating the reading to use
to get the correct pressure.

The food is to be processed at 10 pounds steam pressure; so—

  If the gage reads high—
    1 pound high—process at 11 pounds.
    2 pounds high—process at 12 pounds.
    3 pounds high—process at 13 pounds.
    4 pounds high—process at 14 pounds.

  If the gage reads low—
    1 pound low—process at 9 pounds.
    2 pounds low—process at 8 pounds.
    3 pounds low—process at 7 pounds.
    4 pounds low—process at 6 pounds.

_Have canner thoroughly clean._—Wash canner kettle well if you have not
used it for some time. Don’t put cover in water—wipe it with a soapy
cloth, then with a damp, clean cloth. Dry well.


Water-Bath Canner

Water-bath canners are available on the market. Any big metal container
may be used as a boiling-water-bath canner if it is deep enough so that
the water is well over tops of jars and has space to boil freely. Allow
2 to 4 inches above jar tops for brisk boiling (see sketch). The canner
must have a tight-fitting cover and a wire or wooden rack. If the rack
has dividers, jars will not touch each other or fall against the sides
of the canner during processing.

If a steam-pressure canner is deep enough, you can use it for a water
bath. Cover, but do not fasten. Leave petcock wide open, so that steam
escapes and pressure does not build up inside the canner.

    [Illustration: 76892B]

  Space for brisk boiling—1″ or 2″
  Space for brisk boiling—1″ or 2″
  Space for 1″ to 2″ of water above jar
  Space for 1″ to 2″ of water above jar
  height of jar
  height of jar
  rack space
  rack space


Glass Jars

Be sure all jars and closures are perfect. Discard any with cracks,
chips, dents, or rust; defects prevent airtight seals.

Select the size of closure—widemouth or regular—that fits your jars.

Wash glass jars in hot, soapy water and rinse well. Wash and rinse all
lids and bands. Metal lids with sealing compound may need boiling or
holding in boiling water for a few minutes—follow the manufacturer’s
directions.

If you use rubber rings, have clean, new rings of the right size for the
jars. Don’t test by stretching. Wash rings in hot, soapy water. Rinse
well.


Tin Cans

_Select desired type and size._—Three types of tin cans are used in home
canning—plain tin, C-enamel (corn enamel), and R-enamel (sanitary or
standard enamel). For most products plain tin cans are satisfactory.
Enameled cans are recommended for certain fruits and vegetables to
prevent discoloration of food, but they are not necessary for a
wholesome product.

The types of cans and the foods for which they are recommended are:

     Type                          Recommended for—

  C-enamel    Corn, hominy.
  R-enamel    Beets, red berries, red or black cherries, plums,
                pumpkin, rhubarb, winter squash.
  Plain       All other fruits and vegetables for which canning
                directions are given in this bulletin.

In this bulletin, directions are given for canning most fruits and
vegetables in No. 2 and No. 2½ tin cans. A No. 2 can holds about 2½
cups, and a No. 2½ can about 3½ cups.

_Use only cans in good condition._—See that cans, lids, and gaskets are
perfect. Discard badly bent, dented, or rusted cans, and lids with
damaged gaskets. Keep lids in paper packing until ready to use. The
paper protects the lids from dirt and moisture.

_Wash cans._—Just before use, wash cans in clean water; drain upside
down. Do not wash lids; washing may damage the gaskets. If lids are
dusty or dirty, rinse with clean water or wipe with a damp cloth just
before you put them on the cans.

_Check the sealer._—Make sure the sealer you use is properly adjusted.
To test, put a little water into a can, seal it, then submerge can in
boiling water for a few seconds. If air bubbles rise from around the
can, the seam is not tight. Adjust sealer, following manufacturer’s
directions.

    [Illustration: 76627B

    A can sealer is needed if tin cans are used.]




                       General Canning Procedure


Selecting Fruits and Vegetables for Canning

Choose fresh, firm fruits and young, tender vegetables. Can them before
they lose their freshness. If you must hold them, keep them in a cool,
airy place. If you buy fruits and vegetables to can, try to get them
from a nearby garden or orchard.

For best quality in the canned product, use only perfect fruits and
vegetables. Sort them for size and ripeness; they cook more evenly that
way.


Washing

Wash all fruits and vegetables thoroughly, whether or not they are to be
pared. Dirt contains some of the bacteria hardest to kill. Wash small
lots at a time, under running water or through several changes of water.
Lift the food out of the water each time so dirt that has been washed
off won’t go back on the food. Rinse pan thoroughly between washings.
Don’t let fruits or vegetables soak; they may lose flavor and food
value. Handle them gently to avoid bruising.


Filling Containers

_Raw pack or hot pack._—Fruits and vegetables may be packed raw into
glass jars or tin cans or preheated and packed hot. In this publication
directions for both raw and hot packs are given for most of the foods.

Most raw fruits and vegetables should be packed tightly into the
container because they shrink during processing; a few—like corn, lima
beans, and peas—should be packed loosely because they expand.

Hot food should be packed fairly loosely. It should be at or near
boiling temperature when it is packed.

There should be enough sirup, water, or juice to fill in around the
solid food in the container and to cover the food. Food at the top of
the container tends to darken if not covered with liquid. It takes from
½ to 1½ cups of liquid for a quart glass jar or a No. 2½ tin can.

_Head space._—With only a few exceptions, some space should be left
between the packed food and the closure. The amount of space to allow at
the top of the jar or can is given in the detailed directions for
canning each food.


Closing Glass Jars

Closures for glass jars are of two main types:

_Metal screwband and flat metal lid_ with sealing compound. To use this
type, wipe jar rim clean after produce is packed. Put lid on, with
sealing compound next to glass. Screw metal band down tight by hand.
When band is tight, this lid has enough give to let air escape during
processing. Do not tighten screw band further after taking jar from
canner.

Screw bands that are in good condition may be reused. You may remove
bands as soon as jars are cool. Metal lids with sealing compound may be
used only once.

_Porcelain-lined zinc cap_ with shoulder rubber ring. Fit wet rubber
ring down on jar shoulder, but don’t stretch unnecessarily. Fill jar;
wipe rubber ring and jar rim clean. Then screw cap down firmly and turn
it back ¼ inch. As soon as you take jar from canner, screw cap down
tight, to complete seal.

Porcelain-lined zinc caps may be reused as long as they are in good
condition. Rubber rings should not be reused.

    [Illustration: 76944B]

  Metal screw band
  Metal lid with sealing compound
  Seals here

    [Illustration: 76944B]

  Porcelain lined screw cap
  Rubber
  Seals here


Exhausting and Sealing Tin Cans

Tin cans are sealed before processing. The temperature of the food in
the cans must be 170° F. or higher when the cans are sealed. Food is
heated to this temperature to drive out air so that there will be a good
vacuum in the can after processing and cooling. Removal of air also
helps prevent discoloring of canned food and change in flavor.

Food packed raw must be heated in the cans (exhausted) before the cans
are sealed. Food packed hot may be sealed without further heating if you
are sure the temperature of the food has not dropped below 170° F. To
make sure, test with a thermometer, placing the bulb at the center of
the can. If the thermometer registers lower than 170°, or if you do not
make this test, exhaust the cans.

_To exhaust_, place open, filled cans on a rack in a kettle in which
there is enough boiling water to come to about 2 inches below the tops
of the cans. Cover the kettle. Bring water back to boiling. Boil until a
thermometer inserted at the center of the can registers 170° F.—or for
the length of time given in the directions for the fruit or vegetable
you are canning.

Remove cans from the water one at a time, and add boiling packing liquid
or water if necessary to bring head space back to the level specified
for each product. Place clean lid on filled can. Seal at once.


Processing

Process fruits, tomatoes, and pickled vegetables in a boiling-water-bath
canner according to the directions on page 10. Process vegetables in a
steam-pressure canner according to the directions on page 16.


Cooling Canned Food

_Glass jars._—As you take jars from the canner, complete seals at once
if necessary. If liquid boiled out in processing, do not open jar to add
more. Seal the jar just as it is.

Cool jars top side up. Give each jar enough room to let air get at all
sides. Never set a hot jar on a cold surface; instead set the jars on a
rack or on a folded cloth. Keep hot jars away from drafts, but don’t
slow cooling by covering them.

    [Illustration: BN21476

    Cool jars top side up on a rack, leaving space between jars so air
    can circulate.]

    [Illustration: 76619B

    Cool tin cans in cold water; change water frequently to cool cans
    quickly.]

_Tin cans._—Put tin cans in cold, clean water to cool them; change water
as needed to cool cans quickly. Take cans out of the water while they
are still warm so they will dry in the air. If you stack cans, stagger
them so that air can get around them.


Day-After-Canning Jobs

Test the seal on glass jars with porcelain-lined caps by turning each
jar partly over in your hands. To test a jar that has a flat metal lid,
press center of lid; if lid is down and will not move, jar is sealed. Or
tap the center of the lid with a spoon. A clear, ringing sound means a
good seal. A dull note does not always mean a poor seal; if there’s no
leakage, store the jar and check it for spoilage before use.

If you find a leaky jar, use unspoiled food right away. Or can it again;
empty the jar, and pack and process food as if it were fresh. Before
using jar or lid again check for defects.

When jars are thoroughly cool, take off the screw bands carefully. If a
band sticks, covering for a moment with a hot, damp cloth may help
loosen it.

Before storing canned food, wipe containers clean. Label to show
contents, date, and lot number—if you canned more than one lot in a day.

Wash bands; store them in a dry place.

    [Illustration: BN21468

    Label jars after they have been cooled.]


Storing Canned Food

Canned food should be kept dry and cool, but it should not be subjected
to freezing.

_Dampness_ may corrode tin cans and metal lids of glass jars and
eventually cause leakage.

_Warmth_ may cause canned food to lose quality. Hot pipes behind a wall
sometimes make a shelf or closet too warm for storing food.

_Freezing_ may crack a jar or break a seal and let in bacteria that will
cause spoilage. If it does not damage jar or seal, freezing will not
make food unsafe to eat. To give food in an unheated place some
protection from freezing, cover containers with a blanket or wrap them
in paper.


On Guard Against Spoilage

Don’t use canned food that shows any sign of spoilage. Look closely at
each container before opening it. Bulging can ends, jar lids, or rings,
or a leak—these may mean food has spoiled. When you open a container
look for other signs—spurting liquid, an off odor, or mold.

It’s possible for canned vegetables to contain the poison causing
botulism—a serious food poisoning—without showing signs of spoilage.
There is no danger of botulism if pressure canner is in perfect order
and every canning step is done correctly. But unless you’re absolutely
sure of your gage and canning methods, boil home-canned vegetables
before tasting. Heating usually makes any odor of spoilage more evident.

Bring vegetables to a rolling boil; then cover and boil for at least 10
minutes. Boil spinach and corn 20 minutes. If the food looks spoiled,
foams, or has an off odor during heating, destroy it.

Burn spoiled vegetables, or dispose of the food so that it will not be
eaten by humans or animals.




            How To Can Fruits, Tomatoes, Pickled Vegetables


Fruits, tomatoes, and pickled vegetables are canned according to the
general directions on pages 5 to 8, the detailed directions for each
food on pages 11 to 16, and the special directions given below that
apply only to acid foods.


Points on Packing

_Raw pack._—Put cold, raw fruits into container and cover with
boiling-hot sirup, juice, or water. Press tomatoes down in the
containers so they are covered with their own juice; add no liquid.

_Hot pack._—Heat fruits in sirup, in water or steam, or in extracted
juice before packing. Juicy fruits and tomatoes may be preheated without
added liquid and packed in the juice that cooks out.

    [Illustration: BN21474

    To hot pack fruit, pack heated fruit loosely into jars.]

    [Illustration: BN21469

    Cover fruit with boiling liquid before closing jars and processing
    in boiling-water bath.]


Sweetening Fruit

Sugar helps canned fruit hold its shape, color, and flavor. Directions
for canning most fruits call for sweetening to be added in the form of
sugar sirup. For very juicy fruit packed hot, use sugar without added
liquid.

_To make sugar sirup._—Mix sugar with water or with juice extracted from
some of the fruit. Use a thin, medium, or heavy sirup to suit the
sweetness of the fruit and your taste. To make sirup, combine—

  4 cups of water     2 cups sugar      For 5 cups THIN sirup.
    or juice
                      3 cups sugar      For 5½ cups MEDIUM sirup.
                      4¾ cups sugar     For 6½ cups HEAVY sirup.

Boil sugar and water or juice together 5 minutes. Skim if necessary.

_To extract juice._—Crush thoroughly ripe, sound juicy fruit. Heat to
simmering (185° to 210° F.) over low heat. Strain through jelly bag or
other cloth.

_To add sugar direct to fruit._—For juicy fruit to be packed hot, add
about ½ cup sugar to each quart of raw, prepared fruit. Heat to
simmering (185° to 210° F.) over low heat. Pack fruit in the juice that
cooks out.

_To add sweetening other than sugar._—You can use light corn sirup or
mild-flavored honey to replace as much as half the sugar called for in
canning fruit. Do not use brown sugar, or molasses, sorghum, or other
strong-flavored sirups; their flavor overpowers the fruit flavor and
they may darken the fruit.


Canning Unsweetened Fruit

You may can fruit without sweetening—in its own juice, in extracted
juice, or in water. Sugar is not needed to prevent spoilage; processing
is the same for unsweetened fruit as for sweetened.


Processing in Boiling-Water Bath

_Directions._—Put filled glass jars or tin cans into canner containing
hot or boiling water. For raw pack in glass jars have water in canner
hot but not boiling; for all other packs have water boiling.

Add boiling water if needed to bring water an inch or two over tops of
containers; don’t pour boiling water directly on glass jars. Put cover
on canner.

    [Illustration: 76786B

    After jars are covered with boiling water, place lid on water-bath
    canner and bring water quickly back to boiling.]

When water in canner comes to a rolling boil, start to count processing
time. Boil gently and steadily for time recommended for the food you are
canning. Add boiling water during processing if needed to keep
containers covered.

Remove containers from the canner immediately when processing time is
up.

_Processing times._—Follow times carefully. The times given apply only
when a specific food is prepared according to detailed directions.

If you live at an altitude of 1,000 feet or more, you have to add to
these processing times in canning directions, as follows:

    Altitude     Increase in processing time if the time called for
                                        is—

                20 minutes or less         More than 20 minutes
    1,000 feet  1 minute                   2 minutes.
    2,000 feet  2 minutes                  4 minutes.
    3,000 feet  3 minutes                  6 minutes.
    4,000 feet  4 minutes                  8 minutes.
    5,000 feet  5 minutes                  10 minutes.
    6,000 feet  6 minutes                  12 minutes.
    7,000 feet  7 minutes                  14 minutes.
    8,000 feet  8 minutes                  16 minutes.
    9,000 feet  9 minutes                  18 minutes.
   10,000 feet  10 minutes                 20 minutes.


To Figure Yield of Canned Fruit From Fresh

The number of quarts of canned food you can get from a given quantity of
fresh fruit depends upon the quality, variety, maturity, and size of the
fruit, whether it is whole, in halves, or in slices, and whether it is
packed raw or hot.

Generally, the following amounts of fresh fruit or tomatoes (as
purchased or picked) make 1 quart of canned food:

                                                      _Pounds_

  Apples                                   2½ to 3
  Berries, except strawberries             1½ to 3 (1 to 2 quart boxes)
  Cherries (canned unpitted)               2 to 2½
  Peaches                                  2 to 3
  Pears                                    2 to 3
  Plums                                    1½ to 2½
  Tomatoes                                 2½ to 3½

In 1 pound there are about 4 medium apples, peaches, or tomatoes; 3
medium pears; 12 medium plums.




          Directions for Fruits, Tomatoes, Pickled Vegetables


Apples

Pare and core apples; cut in pieces. To keep fruit from darkening, drop
pieces into water containing 2 tablespoons each of salt and vinegar per
gallon. Drain, then boil 5 minutes in thin sirup or water.

_In glass jars._—Pack hot fruit to ½ inch of top. Cover with hot sirup
or water, leaving ½-inch space at top of jar. Adjust jar lids. Process
in boiling-water bath (212° F.)—

  Pint jars        15 minutes
  Quart jars       20 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack hot fruit to ¼ inch of top. Fill to top with hot
sirup or water. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and seal cans.
Process in boiling-water bath (212° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       10 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      10 minutes


Applesauce

Make applesauce, sweetened or unsweetened. Heat to simmering (185°-210°
F.); stir to keep it from sticking.

_In glass jars._—Pack hot applesauce to ¼ inch of top. Adjust lids.
Process in boiling-water bath (212° F.)—

  Pint jars        10 minutes
  Quart jars       10 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack hot applesauce to top. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10
minutes) and seal cans. Process in boiling-water bath (212° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       10 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      10 minutes


Apricots

Follow method for peaches. Peeling may be omitted.


Beets, Pickled

Cut off beet tops, leaving 1 inch of stem. Also leave root. Wash beets,
cover with boiling water, and cook until tender. Remove skins and slice
beets. For pickling sirup, use 2 cups vinegar (or 1½ cups vinegar and ½
cup water) to 2 cups sugar. Heat to boiling.

Pack beets in glass jars to ½ inch of top. Add ½ teaspoon salt to pints,
1 teaspoon to quarts. Cover with boiling sirup, leaving ½-inch space at
top of jar. Adjust jar lids. Process in boiling-water bath (212° F.)—

  Pint jars        30 minutes
  Quart jars       30 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.


Berries, Except Strawberries

•Raw Pack.—Wash berries; drain.

_In glass jars._—Fill jars to ½ inch of top. For a full pack, shake
berries down while filling jars. Cover with boiling sirup, leaving
½-inch space at top. Adjust lids. Process in boiling-water bath (212°
F.)—

  Pint jars        10 minutes
  Quart jars       15 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Fill cans to ¼ inch of top. For a full pack, shake
berries down while filling cans. Fill to top with boiling sirup. Exhaust
to 170° F. (10 minutes); seal cans. Process in boiling-water bath (212°
F.)—

  No. 2 cans       15 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      20 minutes

•Hot Pack.—(For firm berries)—Wash berries and drain well. Add ½ cup
sugar to each quart fruit. Cover pan and bring to boil; shake pan to
keep berries from sticking.

_In glass jars._—Pack hot berries to ½ inch of top. Adjust jar lids.
Process in boiling-water bath (212° F.)—

  Pint jars        10 minutes
  Quart jars       15 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack hot berries to top. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10
minutes) and seal cans. Process in boiling-water bath (212° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       15 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      20 minutes


Cherries

•Raw Pack.—Wash cherries; remove pits, if desired.

_In glass jars._—Fill jars to ½ inch of top. For a full pack, shake
cherries down while filling jars. Cover with boiling sirup, leaving
½-inch space at top. Adjust lids. Process in boiling-water bath (212°
F.)—

  Pint jars        20 minutes
  Quart jars       25 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Fill cans to ¼ inch of top. For a full pack, shake
cherries down while filling cans. Fill to top with boiling sirup.
Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and seal cans. Process in
boiling-water bath (212° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       20 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      25 minutes

•Hot Pack.—Wash cherries; remove pits, if desired. Add ½ cup sugar to
each quart of fruit. Add a little water to unpitted cherries to keep
them from sticking while heating. Cover pan and bring to a boil.

_In glass jars._—Pack hot to ½ inch of top. Adjust jar lids. Process in
boiling-water bath (212° F.)—

  Pint jars        10 minutes
  Quart jars       15 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack hot to top of cans. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10
minutes) and seal cans. Process in boiling-water bath (212° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       15 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      20 minutes


Fruit Juices

Wash; remove pits, if desired, and crush fruit. Heat to simmering
(185°-210° F.). Strain through cloth bag. Add sugar, if desired—about 1
cup to 1 gallon juice. Reheat to simmering.

_In glass jars._—Fill jars to ½ inch of top with hot juice. Adjust lids.
Process in boiling-water bath (212° F.)—

  Pint jars        5 minutes
  Quart jars       5 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Fill cans to top with hot juice. Seal at once. Process in
boiling-water bath (212° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       5 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      5 minutes


Fruit Purees

Use sound, ripe fruit. Wash; remove pits, if desired. Cut large fruit in
pieces. Simmer until soft; add a little water if needed to keep fruit
from sticking. Put through a strainer or food mill. Add sugar to taste.
Heat again to simmering (185°-210° F.).

_In glass jars._—Pack hot to ½ inch of top. Adjust lids. Process in
boiling-water bath (212° F.)—

  Pint jars        10 minutes
  Quart jars       10 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack hot to top. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes),
and seal cans. Process in boiling-water bath (212° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       10 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      10 minutes


Peaches

Wash peaches and remove skins. Dipping the fruit in boiling water, then
quickly in cold water makes peeling easier. Cut peaches in halves;
remove pits. Slice if desired. To prevent fruit from darkening during
preparation, drop it into water containing 2 tablespoons each of salt
and vinegar per gallon. Drain just before heating or packing raw.

    [Illustration: BN21470

    Peaches can be peeled easily if they are dipped in boiling water,
    then in cold water.]

•Raw Pack.—prepare peaches as directed above.

_In glass jars._—Pack raw fruit to ½ inch of top. Cover with boiling
sirup, leaving ½-inch space at top of jar. Adjust jar lids. Process in
boiling-water bath (212° F.)—

  Pint jars        25 minutes
  Quart jars       30 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack raw fruit to ¼ inch of top. Fill to top with boiling
sirup. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and seal cans. Process in
boiling-water bath (212° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       30 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      35 minutes

•Hot Pack.—Prepare peaches as directed above. Heat peaches through in
hot sirup. If fruit is very juicy you may heat it with sugar, adding no
liquid.

_In glass jars._—Pack hot fruit to ½ inch of top. Cover with boiling
liquid, leaving ½-inch space at top of jar. Adjust jar lids. Process in
boiling-water bath (212° F.)—

  Pint jars        20 minutes
  Quart jars       25 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack hot fruit to ¼ inch of top. Fill to top with boiling
liquid. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and seal cans. Process in
boiling-water bath (212° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       25 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      30 minutes


Pears

Wash pears. Peel, cut in halves, and core. Continue as with peaches,
either raw pack or hot pack.


Plums

Wash plums. To can whole, prick skins. Freestone varieties may be halved
and pitted.

•Raw Pack.—Prepare plums as directed above.

_In glass jars._—Pack raw fruit to ½ inch of top. Cover with boiling
sirup, leaving ½-inch space at top of jar. Adjust jar lids. Process in
boiling-water bath (212° F.)—

  Pint jars        20 minutes
  Quart jars       25 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack raw fruit to ¼ inch of top. Fill to top with boiling
sirup. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and seal cans. Process in
boiling-water bath (212° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       15 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      20 minutes

•Hot Pack.—Prepare plums as directed above. Heat to boiling in sirup or
juice. If fruit is very juicy you may heat it with sugar, adding no
liquid.

_In glass jars._—Pack hot fruit to ½ inch of top. Cover with boiling
liquid, leaving ½-inch space at top of jar. Adjust jar lids. Process in
boiling-water bath (212° F.)—

  Pint jars        20 minutes
  Quart jars       25 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack hot fruit to ¼ inch of top. Fill to top with boiling
liquid. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and seal cans. Process in
boiling-water bath (212° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       15 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      20 minutes


Rhubarb

Wash rhubarb and cut into ½-inch pieces. Add ½ cup sugar to each quart
rhubarb and let stand to draw out juice. Bring to boiling.

_In glass jars._—Pack hot to ½ inch of top. Adjust lids. Process in
boiling-water bath (212° F.)—

  Pint jars        10 minutes
  Quart jars       10 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack hot to top of cans. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10
minutes) and seal cans. Process in boiling-water bath (212° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       10 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      10 minutes


Tomatoes

Use only perfect, ripe tomatoes. To loosen skins, dip into boiling water
for about ½ minute; then dip quickly into cold water. Cut out stem ends
and peel tomatoes.

    [Illustration: 76787B

    To peel tomatoes, dip them in boiling water, then quickly in cold
    water to loosen skins.]

    [Illustration: 76792B

    To raw pack tomatoes, put peeled tomatoes in jars and press down to
    fill spaces.]

•Raw Pack.—Leave tomatoes whole or cut in halves or quarters.

_In glass jars._—Pack tomatoes to ½ inch of top, pressing gently to fill
spaces. Add no water. Add ½ teaspoon salt to pints; 1 teaspoon to
quarts. Adjust lids. Process in boiling-water bath (212° F.)—

  Pint jars        35 minutes
  Quart jars       45 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack tomatoes to top of cans, pressing gently to fill
spaces. Add no water. Add ½ teaspoon salt to No. 2 cans; 1 teaspoon to
No. 2½ cans. Exhaust to 170° F., (about 15 minutes) and seal cans.
Process in boiling-water bath (212° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       45 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      55 minutes

•Hot Pack.—Quarter peeled tomatoes. Bring to boil; stir to keep tomatoes
from sticking.

_In glass jars._—Pack boiling-hot tomatoes to ½ inch of top. Add ½
teaspoon salt to pints; 1 teaspoon to quarts. Adjust jar lids. Process
in boiling-water bath (212° F.)—

  Pint jars        10 minutes
  Quart jars       10 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack boiling-hot tomatoes to ¼ inch of top. Add no water.
Add ½ teaspoon salt to No. 2 cans; 1 teaspoon to No. 2½ cans. Exhaust to
170° F. (about 10 minutes) and seal cans. Process in boiling-water bath
(212° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       10 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      10 minutes


Tomato Juice

Use ripe, juicy tomatoes. Wash, remove stem ends, cut into pieces.
Simmer until softened, stirring often. Put through strainer. Add 1
teaspoon salt to each quart juice. Reheat at once just to boiling.

_In glass jars._—Fill jars with boiling-hot juice to ½ inch of top.
Adjust jar lids. Process in boiling-water bath (212° F.)—

  Pint jars        10 minutes
  Quart jars       10 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Fill cans to top with boiling-hot juice. Seal cans at
once. Process in boiling-water bath (212° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       15 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      15 minutes




                         How To Can Vegetables


Can vegetables according to general directions on pages 5 to 8, the
detailed directions for each vegetable on pages 18 to 28, and special
directions below that apply only to vegetables.


Points on Packing

_Raw pack._—Pack cold raw vegetables (except corn, lima beans, and peas)
tightly into container and cover with boiling water.

_Hot pack._—Preheat vegetables in water or steam. Cover with cooking
liquid or boiling water. Cooking liquid is recommended for packing most
vegetables because it may contain minerals and vitamins dissolved out of
the food. Boiling water is recommended when cooking liquid is dark,
gritty, or strong-flavored, and when there isn’t enough cooking liquid.


Processing in a Pressure Canner

Use a steam-pressure canner for processing all vegetables except
tomatoes and pickled vegetables.

_Directions._—Follow the manufacturer’s directions for the canner you
are using. Here are a few pointers on the use of any steam-pressure
canner:

•Put 2 or 3 inches of boiling water in the bottom of the canner; the
amount of water to use depends on the size and shape of the canner.

•Set filled glass jars or tin cans on rack in canner so that steam can
flow around each container. If two layers of cans or jars are put in,
stagger the second layer. Use a rack between layers of glass jars.

•Fasten canner cover securely so that no steam can escape except through
vent (petcock or weighted-gage opening).

•Watch until steam pours steadily from vent. Let it escape for 10
minutes or more to drive all air from the canner. Then close petcock or
put on weighted gage.

•Let pressure rise to 10 pounds (240° F.). The moment this pressure is
reached start counting processing time. Keep pressure constant by
regulating heat under the canner. Do not lower pressure by opening
petcock. Keep drafts from blowing on canner.

•When processing time is up, remove canner from heat immediately.

_With glass jars_, let canner stand until pressure is zero. Never try to
rush the cooling by pouring cold water over the canner. When pressure
registers zero, wait a minute or two, then slowly open petcock or take
off weighted gage. Unfasten cover and tilt the far side up so steam
escapes away from you. Take jars from canner.

    [Illustration: BN22389

    To process vegetables, bring pressure in canner up to 10 pounds,
    then start to count processing time.]

_With tin cans_, release steam in canner as soon as canner is removed
from heat by opening petcock or taking off weighted gage. Then take off
canner cover and remove cans.

_Processing times._—Follow processing times carefully. The times given
apply only when a specific food is prepared according to detailed
directions.

If you live at an altitude of less than 2,000 feet above sea level,
process vegetables at 10 pounds pressure for the times given.

At altitudes above sea level, it takes more than 10 pounds pressure to
reach 240° F. If you live at an altitude of 2,000 feet, process
vegetables at 11 pounds pressure. At 4,000 feet, use 12 pounds pressure;
at 6,000 feet, 13 pounds pressure; at 8,000 feet, 14 pounds pressure; at
10,000 feet, 15 pounds pressure.

A weighted gage may need to be corrected for altitude by the
manufacturer.


To Figure Yield of Canned Vegetables From Fresh

The number of quarts of canned food you can get from a given amount of
fresh vegetables depends on quality, condition, maturity, and variety of
the vegetable, size of pieces, and on the way the vegetable is
packed—raw or hot pack.

Generally, the following amounts of fresh vegetables (as purchased or
picked) make 1 quart of canned food:

                                             _Pounds_

  Asparagus                       2½ to 4½
  Beans, lima, in pods            3 to 5
  Beans, snap                     1½ to 2½
  Beets, without tops             2 to 3½
  Carrots, without tops           2 to 3
  Corn, sweet, in husks           3 to 6
  Okra                            1½
  Peas, green, in pods            3 to 6
  Pumpkin or winter squash        1½ to 3
  Spinach and other greens        2 to 6
  Squash, summer                  2 to 4
  Sweetpotatoes                   2 to 3




                       Directions for Vegetables


Asparagus

•Raw Pack.—Wash asparagus; trim off scales and tough ends and wash
again. Cut into 1-inch pieces.

_In glass jars._—Pack asparagus as tightly as possible without crushing
to ½ inch of top. Add ½ teaspoon salt to pints; 1 teaspoon to quarts.
Cover with boiling water, leaving ½-inch space at top of jar. Adjust jar
lids. Process in pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        25 minutes
  Quart jars       30 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack asparagus as tightly as possible without crushing to
¼ inch of top. Add ½ teaspoon salt to No. 2 cans; 1 teaspoon to No. 2½
cans. Fill to top with boiling water. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10
minutes) and seal cans. Process in pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure
(240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       20 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      20 minutes

•Hot Pack.—Wash asparagus; trim off scales and tough ends and wash
again. Cut in 1-inch pieces; cover with boiling water. Boil 2 or 3
minutes.

_In glass jars._—Pack hot asparagus loosely to ½ inch of top. Add ½
teaspoon salt to pints; 1 teaspoon to quarts. Cover with boiling-hot
cooking liquid, or if liquid contains grit use boiling water. Leave
½-inch space at top of jar. Adjust jar lids. Process in pressure canner
at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        25 minutes
  Quart jars       30 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack hot asparagus loosely to ½ inch of top. Add ½
teaspoon salt to No. 2 cans; 1 teaspoon to No. 2½ cans. Fill to top with
boiling-hot cooking liquid, or if liquid contains grit use boiling
water. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and seal cans. Process in
pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       20 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      20 minutes


Beans, Dry, With Tomato or Molasses Sauce

Sort and wash dry beans (kidney, navy, or yellow eye). Cover with
boiling water; boil 2 minutes, remove from heat and let soak 1 hour.
Heat to boiling, drain, and save liquid for making sauce.

_In glass jars._—Fill jars three-fourths full with hot beans. Add a
small piece of salt pork, ham, or bacon. Fill to 1 inch of top with hot
sauce (see recipes below). Adjust jar lids. Process in pressure canner
at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        65 minutes
  Quart jars       75 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Fill cans three-fourths full with hot beans. Add a small
piece of salt pork, ham, or bacon. Fill to ¼ inch of top with hot sauce
(see recipes below). Exhaust to 170° F. (about 20 minutes) and seal
cans. Process in pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       65 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      75 minutes

_Tomato sauce._—Mix 1 quart tomato juice, 3 tablespoons sugar, 2
teaspoons salt, 1 tablespoon chopped onion, and ¼ teaspoon mixture of
ground cloves, allspice, mace, and cayenne. Heat to boiling.

Or mix 1 cup tomato catsup with 3 cups of water or soaking liquid from
beans and heat to boiling.

_Molasses sauce._—Mix 1 quart water or soaking liquid from beans, 3
tablespoons dark molasses, 1 tablespoon vinegar, 2 teaspoons salt, and ¾
teaspoon powdered dry mustard. Heat to boiling.


Beans, Dry, Baked

Soak and boil beans according to directions for beans with sauce.

Place small pieces of salt pork, ham, or bacon in earthenware crock or a
pan.

Add beans. Add enough molasses sauce to cover beans. Cover crock and
bake 4 to 5 hours at 350° F. (moderate oven). Add water as needed—about
every hour.

_In glass jars._—Pack hot beans to 1 inch of top. Adjust jar lids.
Process in pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        80 minutes
  Quart jars       100 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack hot beans to ¼ inch of top. Exhaust to 170° F.
(about 15 minutes) and seal cans. Process in pressure canner at 10
pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       95 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      115 minutes


Beans, Fresh Lima

Can only young, tender beans.

•Raw Pack.—Shell and wash beans.

_In glass jars._—Pack raw beans into clean jars. For small-type beans,
fill to 1 inch of top of jar for pints and 1½ inches for quarts; for
large beans, fill to ¾ inch of top for pints and 1¼ inches for quarts.
Beans should not be pressed or shaken down. Add ½ teaspoon salt to
pints; 1 teaspoon to quarts. Fill jar to ½ inch of top with boiling
water. Adjust jar lids. Process in pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure
(240° F.)—

  Pint jars        40 minutes
  Quart jars       50 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack raw beans to ¾ inch of top; do not shake or press
beans down. Add ½ teaspoon salt to No. 2 cans; 1 teaspoon to No. 2½
cans. Fill cans to top with boiling water. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10
minutes) and seal cans. Process in pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure
(240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       40 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      40 minutes

•Hot Pack.—Shell the beans, cover with boiling water, and bring to boil.

_In glass jars._—Pack hot beans loosely to 1 inch of top. Add ½ teaspoon
salt to pints; 1 teaspoon to quarts. Cover with boiling water, leaving
1-inch space at top of jar. Adjust jar lids. Process in pressure canner
at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        40 minutes
  Quart jars       50 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack hot beans loosely to ½ inch of top. Add ½ teaspoon
salt to No. 2 cans; 1 teaspoon to No. 2½ cans. Fill to top with boiling
water. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and seal cans. Process in
pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       40 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      40 minutes


Beans, Snap

•Raw Pack.—Wash beans. Trim ends; cut into 1-inch pieces.

_In glass jars._—Pack raw beans tightly to ½ inch of top. Add ½ teaspoon
salt to pints; 1 teaspoon to quarts. Cover with boiling water, leaving
½-inch space at top of jar. Adjust jar lids. Process in pressure canner
at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        20 minutes
  Quart jars       25 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack raw beans tightly to ¼ inch of top. Add ½ teaspoon
salt to No. 2 cans; 1 teaspoon to No. 2½ cans. Fill to top with boiling
water. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and seal cans. Process in
pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       25 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      30 minutes

•Hot Pack.—Wash beans. Trim ends; cut into 1-inch pieces. Cover with
boiling water; boil 5 minutes.

_In glass jars._—Pack hot beans loosely to ½ inch of top. Add ½ teaspoon
salt to pints; 1 teaspoon to quarts. Cover with boiling-hot cooking
liquid, leaving ½-inch space at top of jar. Adjust jar lids. Process in
pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        20 minutes
  Quart jars       25 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

    [Illustration: BN21475

    To hot pack snap beans, cover cut beans with boiling water and boil
    5 minutes.]

    [Illustration: BN21471

    Then pack hot beans loosely in jar and cover with hot cooking liquid
    before processing in a pressure canner.]

_In tin cans._—Pack hot beans loosely to ¼ inch of top. Add ½ teaspoon
salt to No. 2 cans; 1 teaspoon to No. 2½ cans. Fill to top with
boiling-hot cooking liquid. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and
seal cans. Process in pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       25 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      30 minutes


Beets

Sort beets for size. Cut off tops, leaving an inch of stem. Also leave
root. Wash beets. Cover with boiling water and boil until skins slip
easily—15 to 25 minutes, depending on size. Skin and trim. Leave baby
beets whole. Cut medium or large beets in ½-inch cubes or slices; halve
or quarter very large slices.

_In glass jars._—Pack hot beets to ½ inch of top. Add ½ teaspoon salt to
pints; 1 teaspoon to quarts. Cover with boiling water, leaving ½-inch
space at top of jar. Adjust jar lids. Process in pressure canner at 10
pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        30 minutes
  Quart jars       35 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack hot beets to ¼ inch of top. Add ½ teaspoon salt to
No. 2 cans; 1 teaspoon to No. 2½ cans. Fill to top with boiling water.
Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and seal cans. Process in pressure
canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       30 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      30 minutes


Beets, Pickled

See page 12.


Carrots

•Raw Pack.—Wash and scrape carrots. Slice or dice.

_In glass jars._—Pack raw carrots tightly into clean jars, to 1 inch of
top of jar. Add ½ teaspoon salt to pints; 1 teaspoon to quarts. Fill jar
to ½ inch of top with boiling water. Adjust jar lids. Process in
pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        25 minutes
  Quart jars       30 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack raw carrots tightly into cans to ½ inch of top. Add
½ teaspoon salt to No. 2 cans; 1 teaspoon to No. 2½ cans. Fill cans to
top with boiling water. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and seal
cans. Process in pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       25 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      30 minutes

•Hot Pack.—Wash and scrape carrots. Slice or dice. Cover with boiling
water and bring to boil.

_In glass jars._—Pack hot carrots to ½ inch of top. Add ½ teaspoon salt
to pints; 1 teaspoon to quarts. Cover with boiling-hot cooking liquid,
leaving ½-inch space at top of jar. Adjust jar lids. Process in pressure
canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        25 minutes
  Quart jars       30 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack hot carrots to ¼ inch of top. Add ½ teaspoon salt to
No. 2 cans; 1 teaspoon to No. 2½ cans. Fill with boiling-hot cooking
liquid. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and seal cans. Process in
pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       20 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      25 minutes


Corn, Cream-Style

•Raw Pack.—Husk corn and remove silk. Wash. Cut corn from cob at about
center of kernel and scrape cobs.

_In glass jars._—Use pint jars only. Pack corn to 1½ inches of top; do
not shake or press down. Add ½ teaspoon salt to each jar. Fill to ½ inch
of top with boiling water. Adjust jar lids. Process in pressure canner
at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        95 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Use No. 2 cans only. Pack corn to ½ inch of top; do not
shake or press down. Add ½ teaspoon salt to each can. Fill cans to top
with boiling water. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 25 minutes) and seal cans.
Process in pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       105 minutes

•Hot Pack.—Husk corn and remove silk. Wash. Cut corn from cob at about
center of kernel and scrape cob. To each quart of corn add 1 pint
boiling water. Heat to boiling.

_In glass jars._—Use pint jars only. Pack hot corn to 1 inch of top. Add
½ teaspoon salt to each jar. Adjust jar lids. Process in pressure canner
at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        85 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Use No. 2 cans only. Pack hot corn to top. Add ½ teaspoon
salt to each can. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and seal cans.
Process in pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       105 minutes


Corn, Whole-Kernel

•Raw Pack.—Husk corn and remove silk. Wash. Cut from cob at about
two-thirds the depth of kernel.

_In glass jars._—Pack corn to 1 inch of top; do not shake or press down.
Add ½ teaspoon salt to pints; 1 teaspoon to quarts. Fill to ½ inch of
top with boiling water. Adjust jar lids. Process in pressure canner at
10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        55 minutes
  Quart jars       85 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

    [Illustration: 76621B

    A nail driven at an angle through the cutting board (see arrow)
    holds the cob steady and makes it easy to cut corn from the cob.]

_In tin cans._—Pack corn to ½ inch of top; do not shake or press down.
Add ½ teaspoon salt to No. 2 cans; 1 teaspoon to No. 2½ cans. Fill to
top with boiling water. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and seal
cans. Process in pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       60 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      60 minutes

•Hot Pack.—Husk corn and remove silk. Wash. Cut from cob at about
two-thirds the depth of kernel. To each quart of corn add 1 pint boiling
water. Heat to boiling.

_In glass jars._—Pack hot corn to 1 inch of top and cover with
boiling-hot cooking liquid, leaving 1-inch space at top of jar. Or fill
to 1 inch of top with mixture of corn and liquid. Add ½ teaspoon salt to
pints; 1 teaspoon to quarts. Adjust jar lids. Process in pressure canner
at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        55 minutes
  Quart jars       85 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

    [Illustration: 76624B

    To hot pack corn, put heated corn loosely in C-enamel cans; fill
    cans with boiling liquid.]

_In tin cans._—Pack hot corn to ½ inch of top and fill to top with
boiling-hot cooking liquid. Or fill to top with mixture of corn and
liquid. Add ½ teaspoon salt to No. 2 cans; 1 teaspoon to No. 2½ cans.
Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and seal cans. Process in pressure
canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       60 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      60 minutes


Hominy

Place 2 quarts of dry field corn in an enameled pan; add 8 quarts of
water and 2 ounces of lye. Boil vigorously ½ hour, then allow to stand
for 20 minutes. Rinse off the lye with several hot water rinses. Follow
with cold water rinses to cool for handling.

Work hominy with the hands until dark tips of kernels are removed (about
5 minutes). Separate the tips from the corn by floating them off in
water or by placing the corn in a coarse sieve and washing thoroughly.
Add sufficient water to cover hominy about 1 inch, and boil 5 minutes;
change water. Repeat 4 times. Then cook until kernels are soft (½ to ¾
hour) and drain. This will make about 6 quarts of hominy.

_In glass jars._—Pack hot hominy to ½ inch of top. Add ½ teaspoon salt
to pints; 1 teaspoon to quarts. Cover with boiling water, leaving ½-inch
space at top of jar. Adjust jar lids. Process in pressure canner at 10
pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        60 minutes
  Quart jars       70 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack hot hominy to ¼ inch of top. Add ½ teaspoon salt to
No. 2 cans; 1 teaspoon to No. 2½ cans. Fill to top with boiling water.
Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and seal cans. Process in pressure
canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       60 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      70 minutes


Mushrooms

Trim stems and discolored parts of mushrooms. Soak mushrooms in cold
water for 10 minutes to remove adhering soil. Wash in clean water. Leave
small mushrooms whole; cut larger ones in halves or quarters. Steam 4
minutes or heat gently for 15 minutes without added liquid in a covered
saucepan.

_In glass jars._—Pack hot mushrooms to ½ inch of top. Add ¼ teaspoon
salt to half pints; ½ teaspoon to pints. For better color, add
crystalline ascorbic acid—¹/₁₆ teaspoon to half-pints; ⅛ teaspoon to
pints. Add boiling-hot cooking liquid or boiling water to cover
mushrooms, leaving ½-inch space at top of jar. Adjust jar lids. Process
in pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Half-pint jars   30 minutes
  Pint jars        30 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack hot mushrooms to ¼ inch of top of cans. Add ½
teaspoon salt to No. 2 cans. For better color, add ⅛ teaspoon of
crystalline ascorbic acid to No. 2 cans. Then fill to top with
boiling-hot cooking liquid or boiling water. Exhaust to 170° F. (about
10 minutes) and seal cans. Process in pressure canner at 10 pounds
pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       30 minutes


Okra

Can only tender pods. Wash; trim. Cook for 1 minute in boiling water.
Cut into 1-inch lengths or leave pods whole.

_In glass jars._—Pack hot okra to ½ inch of top. Add ½ teaspoon salt to
pints; 1 teaspoon to quarts. Cover with boiling water, leaving ½-inch
space at top of jar. Adjust jar lids. Process in pressure canner at 10
pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        25 minutes
  Quart jars       40 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack hot okra to ¼ inch of top. Add ½ teaspoon salt to
No. 2 cans; 1 teaspoon to No. 2½ cans. Fill to top with boiling water.
Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and seal cans. Process in pressure
canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       25 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      35 minutes


Peas, Fresh Blackeye (Cow-peas, Blackeye Beans)

•Raw Pack.—Shell and wash blackeye peas.

_In glass jars._—Pack raw blackeye peas to 1½ inches of top of pint jars
and 2 inches of top of quart jars; do not shake or press peas down. Add
½ teaspoon salt to pints; 1 teaspoon to quarts. Cover with boiling
water, leaving ½-inch space at top of jars. Adjust jar lids. Process in
pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        35 minutes
  Quart jars       40 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack raw blackeye peas to ¾ inch of top; do not shake or
press down. Add ½ teaspoon salt to No. 2 cans; 1 teaspoon to No. 2½
cans. Cover with boiling water, leaving ¼-inch space at top of cans.
Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and seal cans. Process in pressure
canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       35 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      40 minutes

•Hot Pack.—Shell and wash blackeye peas, cover with boiling water, and
bring to a rolling boil. Drain.

_In glass jars._—Pack hot blackeye peas to 1¼ inches of top of pint jars
and 1½ inches of top of quart jars; do not shake or press peas down. Add
½ teaspoon salt to pints; 1 teaspoon to quarts. Cover with boiling
water, leaving ½-inch space at top of jar. Adjust jar lids. Process in
pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        35 minutes
  Quart jars       40 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack hot blackeye peas to ½ inch of top; do not shake or
press peas down. Add ½ teaspoon salt to No. 2 cans; 1 teaspoon to No. 2½
cans. Cover with boiling water, leaving ¼-inch space at top of cans.
Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and seal cans. Process in pressure
canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       30 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      35 minutes


Peas, Fresh Green

•Raw Pack.—Shell and wash peas.

_In glass jars._—Pack peas to 1 inch of top; do not shake or press down.
Add ½ teaspoon salt to pints; 1 teaspoon to quarts. Cover with boiling
water, leaving 1½ inches of space at top of jar. Adjust jar lids.
Process in pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        40 minutes
  Quart jars       40 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack peas to ¼ inch of top; do not shake or press down.
Add ½ teaspoon salt to No. 2 cans; 1 teaspoon to No. 2½ cans. Fill to
top with boiling water. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and seal
cans. Process at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       30 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      35 minutes

•Hot Pack.—Shell and wash peas. Cover with boiling water. Bring to boil.

_In glass jars._—Pack hot peas loosely to 1 inch of top. Add ½ teaspoon
salt to pints; 1 teaspoon to quarts. Cover with boiling water, leaving
1-inch space at top of jar. Adjust jar lids. Process in pressure canner
at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        40 minutes
  Quart jars       40 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack hot peas loosely to ¼ inch of top. Add ½ teaspoon
salt to No. 2 cans; 1 teaspoon to No. 2½ cans. Fill to top with boiling
water. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and seal cans. Process at
10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       30 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      35 minutes


Potatoes, Cubed

Wash, pare, and cut potatoes into ½-inch cubes. Dip cubes in brine (1
teaspoon salt to 1 quart water) to prevent darkening. Drain. Cook for 2
minutes in boiling water, drain.

_In glass jars._—Pack hot potatoes to ½ inch of top. Add ½ teaspoon salt
to pints; 1 teaspoon to quarts. Cover with boiling water, leaving ½-inch
space at top of jar. Adjust jar lids. Process in pressure canner at 10
pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        35 minutes
  Quart jars       40 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack hot potatoes to ¼ inch of top. Add ½ teaspoon salt
to No. 2 cans; 1 teaspoon to No. 2½ cans. Fill to top with boiling
water. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and seal cans. Process in
pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       35 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      40 minutes


Potatoes, Whole

Use potatoes 1 to 2½ inches in diameter. Wash, pare, and cook in boiling
water for 10 minutes. Drain.

_In glass jars._—Pack hot potatoes to ½ inch of top. Add ½ teaspoon salt
to pints; 1 teaspoon to quarts. Cover with boiling water, leaving ½-inch
space at top of jar. Adjust jar lids. Process in pressure canner at 10
pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        30 minutes
  Quart jars       40 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack hot potatoes to ¼ inch of top. Add ½ teaspoon salt
to No. 2 cans; 1 teaspoon to No. 2½ cans. Fill to top with boiling
water. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and seal cans. Process in
pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       35 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      40 minutes


Pumpkin, Cubed

Wash pumpkin, remove seeds, and pare. Cut into 1-inch cubes. Add just
enough water to cover; bring to boil.

_In glass jars._—Pack hot cubes to ½ inch of top. Add ½ teaspoon salt to
pints; 1 teaspoon to quarts. Cover with hot cooking liquid, leaving
½-inch space at top of jar. Adjust jar lids. Process in pressure canner
at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        55 minutes
  Quart jars       90 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack hot cubes to ¼ inch of top. Add ½ teaspoon salt to
No. 2 cans; 1 teaspoon to No. 2½ cans. Fill to top with hot cooking
liquid. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and seal cans. Process in
pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       50 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      75 minutes


Pumpkin, Strained

Wash pumpkin, remove seeds, and pare. Cut into 1-inch cubes. Steam until
tender, about 25 minutes. Put through food mill or strainer. Simmer
until heated through; stir to keep pumpkin from sticking to pan.

_In glass jars._—Pack hot to ½ inch of top. Add no liquid or salt.
Adjust jar lids. Process at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        65 minutes
  Quart jars       80 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack hot to ⅛ inch of top. Add no liquid or salt. Exhaust
to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and seal cans. Process in pressure canner
at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       75 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      90 minutes


Spinach (and Other Greens)

Can only freshly picked, tender spinach. Pick over and wash thoroughly.
Cut out tough stems and midribs. Place about 2½ pounds of spinach in a
cheesecloth bag and steam about 10 minutes or until well wilted.

_In glass jars._—Pack hot spinach loosely to ½ inch of top. Add ¼
teaspoon salt to pints; ½ teaspoon to quarts. Cover with boiling water,
leaving ½-inch space at top of jar. Adjust jar lids. Process in pressure
canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        70 minutes
  Quart jars       90 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack hot spinach loosely to ¼ inch of top. Add ¼ teaspoon
salt to No. 2 cans; ½ teaspoon to No. 2½ cans. Fill to top with boiling
water. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and seal cans. Process in
pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       65 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      75 minutes

    [Illustration: 78351B

    To raw pack squash, pack uniform pieces of squash tightly into
    jars.]

    [Illustration: 78352B

    Cover squash with boiling water just before closing jars and putting
    in pressure canner.]


Squash, Summer

•Raw Pack.—Wash but do not pare squash. Trim ends. Cut squash into
½-inch slices; halve or quarter to make pieces of uniform size.

_In glass jars._—Pack raw squash tightly into clean jars to 1 inch of
top of jar. Add ½ teaspoon salt to pints; 1 teaspoon to quarts. Fill jar
to ½ inch of top with boiling water. Adjust jar lids. Process in
pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        25 minutes
  Quart jars       30 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack raw squash tightly into cans to ½ inch of top. Add ½
teaspoon salt to No. 2 cans; 1 teaspoon to No. 2½ cans. Fill cans to top
with boiling water. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and seal cans.
Process in pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       20 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      20 minutes

    [Illustration: BN21467

    When processing time is up, let pressure in canner drop to zero.
    Slowly open petcock or take off weighted gage. Unfasten cover,
    tilting far side up so steam escapes away from you.]

•Hot Pack.—Wash squash and trim ends; do not pare. Cut squash into
½-inch slices; halve or quarter to make pieces of uniform size. Add just
enough water to cover. Bring to boil.

_In glass jars._—Pack hot squash loosely to ½ inch of top. Add ½
teaspoon salt to pints; 1 teaspoon to quarts. Cover with boiling-hot
cooking liquid, leaving ½-inch space at top of jar. Adjust jar lids.
Process in pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        30 minutes
  Quart jars       40 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack hot squash loosely to ¼ inch of top. Add ½ teaspoon
salt to No. 2 cans; 1 teaspoon to No. 2½ cans. Fill to top with
boiling-hot cooking liquid. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and
seal cans. Process in pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       20 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      20 minutes


Squash, Winter

Follow method for pumpkin.


Sweetpotatoes, Dry Pack

Wash sweetpotatoes. Sort for size. Boil or steam until partially soft
(20 to 30 minutes). Skin. Cut in pieces if large.

_In glass jars._—Pack hot sweetpotatoes tightly to 1 inch of top,
pressing gently to fill spaces. Add no salt or liquid. Adjust jar lids.
Process in pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        65 minutes
  Quart jars       95 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack hot sweetpotatoes tightly to top of can, pressing
gently to fill spaces. Add no salt or liquid. Exhaust to 170° F. (about
10 minutes) and seal cans. Process in pressure canner at 10 pounds
pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       80 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      95 minutes


Sweetpotatoes, Wet Pack

Wash sweetpotatoes. Sort for size. Boil or steam just until skins slip
easily. Skin and cut in pieces.

_In glass jars._—Pack hot sweetpotatoes to 1 inch of top. Add ½ teaspoon
salt to pints; 1 teaspoon to quarts. Cover with boiling water or medium
sirup, leaving 1-inch space at top of jar. Adjust jar lids. Process in
pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  Pint jars        55 minutes
  Quart jars       90 minutes

As soon as you remove jars from canner, complete seals if necessary.

_In tin cans._—Pack hot sweetpotatoes to ¼ inch of top. Add ½ teaspoon
salt to No. 2 cans; 1 teaspoon to No. 2½ cans. Fill to top with boiling
water or medium sirup. Exhaust to 170° F. (about 10 minutes) and seal
cans. Process in pressure canner at 10 pounds pressure (240° F.)—

  No. 2 cans       70 minutes
  No. 2½ cans      90 minutes




                         Questions and Answers


Q. _Is it safe to process foods in the oven?_

A. No, oven canning is dangerous. Jars may explode. The temperature of
the food in jars during oven processing does not get high enough to
insure destruction of spoilage bacteria in vegetables.


Q. _Why is open-kettle canning not recommended for fruits and
vegetables?_

A. In open-kettle canning, food is cooked in an ordinary kettle, then
packed into hot jars and sealed without processing. For vegetables, the
temperatures obtained in open-kettle canning are not high enough to
destroy all the spoilage organisms that may be in the food. Spoilage
bacteria may get in when the food is transferred from kettle to jar.


Q. _May a pressure canner be used for processing fruits and tomatoes?_

A. Yes. If it is deep enough it may be used as a water-bath canner (p. 4
). Or you may use a pressure canner to process fruits and tomatoes at 0
to 1 pound pressure without having the containers of food completely
covered with water. Put water in the canner to the shoulders of the
jars; fasten cover. When live steam pours steadily from the open vent,
start counting time. Leave vent open and process for the same times
given for the boiling-water bath.


Q. _Must glass jars and lids be sterilized by boiling before canning?_

A. No, not when boiling-water bath or pressure-canner method is used.
The containers as well as the food are sterilized during processing. But
be sure jars and lids are clean.


Q. _Why is liquid sometimes lost from glass jars during processing?_

A. Loss of liquid may be due to packing jars too full, fluctuating
pressure in a pressure canner, or lowering pressure too suddenly.


Q. _Should liquid lost during processing be replaced?_

A. No, never open a jar and refill with liquid—this would let in
bacteria and you would need to process again. Loss of liquid does not
cause food to spoil, though the food above the liquid may darken.


Q. _Is it safe to use canned food if liquid is cloudy?_

A. Cloudy liquid may be a sign of spoilage. But it may be caused by the
minerals in hard water, or by starch from overripe vegetables. If liquid
is cloudy, boil the food. Do not taste or use any food that foams during
heating or has an off odor.


Q. _Why does canned fruit sometimes float in jars?_

A. Fruit may float because pack is too loose or sirup too heavy; or
because some air remains in tissues of the fruit after heating and
processing.


Q. _Is it safe to can foods without salt?_

A. Yes. Salt is used for flavor only and is not necessary for safe
processing.


Q. _What makes canned foods change color?_

A. Darkening of foods at the tops of jars may be caused by oxidation due
to air in the jars or by too little heating or processing to destroy
enzymes. Overprocessing may cause discoloration of foods throughout the
containers.

Pink and blue colors sometimes seen in canned pears, apples, and peaches
are caused by chemical changes in the coloring matter of the fruit.

Iron and copper from cooking utensils or from water in some localities
may cause brown, black, and gray colors in some foods.

When canned corn turns brown, the discoloring may be due to the variety
of corn, to stage of ripeness, to overprocessing, or to copper or iron
pans.

Packing liquid may cause fading of highly colored foods. The use of
plain tin cans will cause some foods to lose color (p. 4).


Q. _Is it safe to eat discolored canned foods?_

A. The color changes noted above do not mean the food is unsafe to eat.
However, spoilage may also cause color changes. Any canned food that has
an unusual color should be examined carefully before use (p. 8).


Q. _Does ascorbic acid help keep fruits and vegetables from darkening?_

A. Yes. The addition of ¼ teaspoon of crystalline ascorbic acid (vitamin
C) to a quart of fruit or vegetable before it is processed retards
oxidation, which is one cause of darkening of canned foods. One teaspoon
of crystalline ascorbic acid weighs about 3 grams (or 3,000 milligrams).


Q. _Is it all right to use preservatives in home canning?_

A. No. Some canning powders or other chemical preservatives may be
harmful.


Q. _Why do the undersides of metal lids sometimes discolor?_

A. Natural compounds in some foods corrode the metal and make a brown or
black deposit on the underside of the lid. This deposit is harmless.


Q. _When canned or frozen fruits are bought in large containers, is it
possible to can them in smaller containers?_

A. Any canned or frozen fruit may be heated through, packed, and
processed the same length of time as recommended for hot packs. This
canned food may be of lower quality than if fruit had been canned when
fresh.


Q. _Is it safe to leave food in tin cans after opening?_

A. Yes. Food in tin cans needs only to be covered and refrigerated.


Q. _Is the processing time the same no matter what kind of range is
used?_

A. Processing times and temperatures in this bulletin are for canning in
a pressure canner or boiling-water bath with any type of range.


Q. _Can fruits and vegetables be canned without heating if aspirin is
used?_

A. No. Aspirin cannot be relied on to prevent spoilage or to give
satisfactory products. Adequate heat treatment is the only safe
procedure.




                                 INDEX


                                   A
  Altitude, high, canning at                                      11, 17
  Apples                                                              11
  Applesauce                                                          12
  Apricots                                                            12
  Ascorbic acid                                                   23, 30
  Asparagus                                                           18
  Aspirin                                                             30


                                   B
  Beans, dry                                                      18, 19
  Beans, fresh lima                                                   19
  Beans, snap                                                         19
  Beets                                                               20
  Beets, pickled                                                      12
  Berries                                                             12
  Botulinus poisoning                                                  8


                                   C
  Carrots                                                             21
  Cherries                                                            12
  Corn                                                                21


                                   D
  Discoloration, causes                                               30


                                   F
  Frozen foods, canning                                               30
  FRUIT—
      floating, cause                                                 29
      how to can                                                       9
      juices                                                          13
      preparation for canning                                          5
      purees                                                          13
      yield of canned from fresh                                      11


                                   G
  Gage                                                                 3
  GLASS JARS—
      filling                                                   5, 9, 16
      preparing for use                                                4
      processing                                                   4, 17
      sealing                                                          6
      sterilization                                                   29
  Greens                                                              26


                                   H
  Hominy                                                              23
  Honey, used in canning fruit                                        10


                                   J
  JUICES—
      fruit                                                           13
      tomato                                                          15


                                   L
  Leaks, tests for                                                     8
  Lima beans, fresh                                                   19
  LIQUID—
      cloudy                                                          29
      cooking, when to use                                            16
      loss in canning                                                 29


                                   M
  Mushrooms                                                           23


                                   O
  Okra                                                                24
  Open-kettle canning                                                 29
  Oven canning                                                        29


                                   P
  PACKING—
      fruits                                                        5, 9
      hot pack                                                  5, 9, 16
      raw pack                                                  5, 9, 16
      vegetables                                                   5, 16
  Peaches                                                             13
  Pears                                                               14
  Peas, fresh blackeye                                                24
  Peas, fresh green                                                   24
  Plums                                                               14
  Potatoes                                                            25
  Preservatives                                                       30
  Pressure saucepan                                                    3
  Pumpkin                                                             25
  Purees, fruit                                                       13


                                   R
  Recanning fruit                                                     30
  Rhubarb                                                             14
  Rubber rings                                                      4, 6


                                   S
  Salt, canning without                                               29
  Sealer, tin-can, testing                                             5
  Seals, testing                                                       8
  Sirup, corn                                                         10
  Sirup, sugar                                                         9
  Spoilage                                                         8, 30
  Spinach                                                             26
  Squash                                                              26
  STEAM-PRESSURE CANNER—
      care                                                             3
      for processing fruit                                            29
      processing in                                                   16
  Storage                                                              8
  SUGAR—
      canning without                                                 10
      in canning fruit                                                 9
  Sweetpotatoes                                                       28


                                   T
  TIN CANS—
      exhausting                                                       6
      filling                                                      5, 16
      holding food in opened can                                      30
      preparing for use                                                5
      processing                                                      17
      types                                                            4
  Tomatoes                                                            15
  Tomato juice                                                        15


                                   V
  VEGETABLES—
      how to can                                                      16
      preparation for canning                                          5
      yield of canned from fresh                                      17


                                   W
  WATER-BATH CANNER—
      preparing for use                                                4
      processing in                                                   10




                            MORE INFORMATION


When you preserve food at home, other publications of the Agricultural
Research Service listed below may help you. They can be obtained from
the Office of Information, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington,
D.C. 20250.

                                                                    _Order
                                                                      No._
  Home Canning of Meat                                                  G6
  Home Freezing of Fruits and Vegetables                               G10
  Freezing Combination Main Dishes                                     G40
  Home Freezers—Their Selection and Use                                G48
  How To Make Jellies, Jams, and Preserves at Home                     G56
  Home Freezing of Poultry                                             G70
  Making Pickles and Relishes at Home                                  G92
  Freezing Meat and Fish in the Home                                   G93


This is a _Consumer Service_ of USDA

                         U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1965 O—773-146




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOME CANNING OF FRUITS AND
VEGETABLES ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
